IAM in GCP

GCP Resource hierarchy:

Top of hierarchy	^	All folders and projects can be brought under an organization. 
					|
					|	Folders can contain other folders with projects within them as well. 
					|
					|	Projects can be organized into folders.
					|
bottom of hierarchy |	All tools and resources in GCP are organized into projects.

Policies inherit downwards in the hierarchy

Resources should be grouped according to organizational structure. 
Levels of hierarcy provide tust boundaries and resource isolation. 

Projects are the basis of using services in GCP	
	enable resource tracking and quota usage
	enable billing
	manage permissions and credentials
	enable services and APIs

Projects have 3 identiable attributes. 	
1. project ID			Globally Unique					Chosen by user		 Immutable	
2. project name			Does not need to be unique		Chosen by user		 Mutable
3. Project Number		Globally Unique					Assigned by GCP		 Immutable


Folders are usable but not required. 
They are an abstraction tool designed to enable better clustering of projects that share a common goal within a system. 
	The resources in a folder inherit IAM policies from the folder it is contained within (recursive). 
	This helps remove the need to put duplicate policies on 2 different folders. 
	To use folder you MUST have an organization node at the top of the hierarchy. 
			Organization 	is the root node for google cloud resources. 
							allows centralized visibility for how resources are being used. 
		Organization admin  policy administrator has broad control of all cloud resources.
		Project creator 	has fine grained congrol of project creation.

GSuite customers (If you own a domain through google) will organize projects under that domain. 
IAM will allow you to create an organization. 

When creating an organization there is open access to create projects and allocate resources to prevent work being impeded. 
It should be a first step to set up hierachy and control who can and who cannot create projects and allocate resources. 

Example: 
A policy is set on a resource
	Each policy contains a set of roles and role members.
Resources inherit policies from a parent. 
	Resource policies are a union of parent and resource. 
A less restrictive parent policy OVERRIDES a more restrictive resource policy. 
(The more generous policy overrides the less restrictive policy)


IAM allows administrators to define WHO can do WHAT on WHICH Resource.

Who - defined by google account, google group, gsuite domain, service account, cloud identity domain.
What - is defined by IAM Role
		IAM Role - a collection of permissions.
		Because doing any one function requires a number of different permissions an IAM Role enables an admin to set up a 
		user with a Role or Roles to allow them to do their job and make it easier for the admin to manage.
		
There are 3 kinds of Roles in Cloud IAM
	Primitive - Broad rules applied to a GCP project and they affect all resources within the project. 
				Owner - invite members, remove members, delete projects and... (owner can also do the billing administrator role)
				Editor - Deploy application, modify code, configure services and...
				Viewer - read-only access. 
				Billing Administrator - manage billing and add/remove administrators. 
		A project can have multiple owners, editors, and billing administrators. 
	Predefined - roles apply to a particular GCP service in a project. 
	Custom - mentioned but not gone into detail. 

IAM Roles - 

Example Role:
Compute Engine Instance admin Role allows
	compute.instances.delete
	compute.instances.get
	compute.instances.list
	compute.instances.setMachineType
	compute.instances.start
	compute.instances.stop
This Role can be applied to a group and that group can have these rules applied to a folder or project. 

Custom roles - a custom role can be created to fit with an organizations specific least privileged model

example custom role
Applied to a particular group that applies to a specific project
named: InstanceOperator
Permissions	compute.instances.get
			compute.instances.list
			compute.instances.start
			compute.instances.stop

Custom role caveats:
				1. Custom roles must be manually defined.
				2. Custoom rolse may only be used at the project or organization level, and cannot be used at the folder level. 
				
Service accounts - control server to server interactions
	- provide an identity for carrying out server-to-server interactions in a project
	- Used to authenticate from one service to another
	- Userd to control privileges used by resources
		-sot that application can do things for authenticated end users. 
	- service accounts are identified with an email address:
			Example: PROJECT_NUMBER-compute@developer.gserviceaccount.com
					 PROJECT_ID@appspot.gserviceaccount.com

	- service account use crptographic keys to authenticate. 
		- google manages these keys for the Compute Engine and the App Engine.
	- Predefined or custom IAM role can be assigned to the service account. 

Different VMs in a project can be granted different Identities in order to manage different permissions for each group.
The permissions for the service accounts can be changed without having to rebuild the VMs. 
creating different permissions can prevent miscoded applications or compromised VMs from wreaking havoc on the system at large. 


Interacting with Google Cloud Platform		

4 ways to interact with GCP
1. Cloud Platform Console - Web user interface
	create and manage projects
	access to GCP APIs
	access to Cloud Shell		
2. Cloud Shell and Cloud SDK - Command Line interface
	Cloud Shell is a non-persistant VM with google cloud SDK installed
	GCP SDK (Software Development Kit) has command line toolsl for GCP products and services
		gcloud - primary CLI interface for google cloud. 
		gsutil (Cloud storage) - 
		bq (Big Query) - 
	This is accessed by clicking the Cloud Shell icon on the GCP console.
	The SDK can be installed on laptops, on premise servers, and VMs in other clouds etc. (Also available as a Docker image)
		SDK Composed of RESTful APIs (REST = Representational State Transfer Paradigm)
			- programatic access to products and services
				- JSON as an interchange format
				- OAuth 2.0 for authentication/authorization
			- Enabled through GCP Console
				- Most APIs are off by default. 
				- Most APIs include daily quotas and rates (limits) that can be raised if requested. (Plan ahead to manage required capacity)
				- API Explorer https://cloud.google.com/apis/

3. Cloud Console Mobile app - iOS and Android
4. REST-based API - for custom applications. 
	APIs Explorer
		- Interactive tool that allows one to try google APIs in the browser
		- things you can do:
			- Browse through available APIs and versions of an API
			- See methods available for each API and what parameters are supported (and built in documentation)
			- Execute requests for any method and see real time responses. 
			- Make authenticated and authorized API calls. 
			
	Client Libraries to control GCP resources from within code
		- Cloud Client Libraries (Community owned hand-crafted client libraries)
			- Observation these can get very specific.
		- Google API client libraries
			- Open source generated
			- Support for multiple languages (Java, Python, Javascript, PHP, .NET, Go, Node.js, Ruby, Objective-C, Dart)
			- Observation these are more general use and broad.


Cloud Marketplace (used to be CloudLauncher)
	- tool for quickly deploying functional software packages on GCP. 
	- some are google and others are made by 3rd party vendors. 
		- third party tools may charge monthly fees. 